1. This software (and its documentation) is copyrighted; please see the
   documentation for details. (Don't panic: it's free...)

2. I don't think mkdrawf will work under RISC OS 2, because it uses
   FontManager calls that didn't exist then (for calculating text
   bounding boxes). If you have RISC OS 2, you can replace the
   relevant code with something more simple-minded -- copy the code
   that's used when an undeclared font is found. Of course, some of
   the drawfile object types aren't understood by RISC OS 2's !Draw,
   but that's a different matter...
   decdrawf should be completely OK with RISC OS 2.
   !Drawf uses some RISC OS 3 calls, but not (I think) so essentially
   that you couldn't make it work under RISC OS 2. For this you will
   probably want the source for o.glib -- ask me.

3. What follows is a brief 'map' of this distribution.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source
------

  contains source code, of course.

    Source.c
    Source.h
    Source.o
    Source.s
      are just what you'd expect (.s is assembler)
      and contain the complete source code, and object files for
      the machine-code bits (so you don't need an assembler).

    Source.mdkrawf
    Source.decdrawf
      are the actual programs (so you don't need a compiler or assembler).
      You should move them to somewhere in your Run$Path.

    Source.Makefile
      is, erm, a makefile. You may need to change some of the definitions
      at the start.

Doc
---

  contains documentation.

    Doc.Manual.Impression
    Doc.Manual.Text
    Doc.ManualP      <-- not actually included!, but I can send it to you
      contain basically the same material, except that some illustrative
      drawfiles aren't in ManualT. In order these are in Impression format,
      plain text and PostScript.
      Incidentally, if you try to print out Manual.ImpressionI on a
      PoscScript printer you are likely to have trouble, because many can't
      cope with the length of the path in the snowflake curve example.
      I can tell you how to get round this.

    Doc.Manual.makemanual
    Doc.Manual.fixddf
    Doc.Manual.fixtext
      are Perl scripts for generating the manual in text or DDF
      form, from a single source file. (I used to maintain the
      two formats separately, and it became unpleasant...)

    Doc.Manual.source
      is the input file for the "makemanual" script.

    Doc.Manual.Examples
      contains the examples used in the manual, as "mkdrawf" input
      files and as drawfiles.

    Doc.TutorialI
    Doc.TutorialT
    Doc.TutorialP    <-- like ManualP, nonexistent
      contain a fairly gentle introduction to the use of mkdrawf and
      decdrawf. If you find the manual heavy going, you might like to
      try this.

    Doc.DrawfI
    Doc.DrawfT
    Doc.DrawfP       <-- guess what?
      contain documentation for !Drawf, a Wimp front end for mkdrawf and
      decdrawf. This is short, and it won't take you long to read it.

    Doc.Changes
      contains an entry for every new version since 2.20, saying what's
      changed. It's more for my convenience than yours :-).

    Doc.Credits
      is just what you think it is.

    Doc.Custom
      tells you a bit about how to proceed if you want to make changes
      to mkdrawf.

Examples
--------

  contains several example files of "mkdrawf" source code. Between them
  they exhibit most of the features of "mkdrawf" not covered by the
  examples in the manual. There are also some drawfiles to decode
  with "decdrawf".

    Examples.src
      is mkdrawf source code.

    Examples.draw
      is for drawfiles.

    Examples.dec
      is a good place to put decoded drawfiles. I suggest here rather than
      .src, so that if you decode something you created with mkdrawf you
      don't overwrite the original source.

    Examples.Makefile
      is a makefile, to save you a bit of typing.

Goodies
-------

  contains a couple of programs that produce mkdrawf code. You could
  implement these completely in mkdrawf, but (1) it's nicer in a better
  programming language, and (2) I wrote them before mkdrawf had any
  programming features.

  It also contains a useful program to compute the intersection of two
  lines. Of course this really could be done in mkdrawf code, and that
  might be a better way in most cases, but...

  Goodies.c.dodec
  Goodies.c.icos
    produce, respectively, a dodecahedron and an icosahedron. Each
    should be called with 3 command-line arguments, which are rotation
    angles in degrees. Experiment!
  Goodies.c.icosi
    is an interactive version of icos, which displays its output on
    the screen and allows you to change the parameters.
  Goodies.c.intersect
    takes 8 numbers (4 pairs of coordinates) and computes the intersection
    of two lines. The args should be given in the order
      line-1-point-1-x line-1-point-1-y line-1-point-2-x line-1-point-2-y
      line-2-point-1-x line-2-point-1-y line-2-point-2-x line-2-point-2-y .

  Goodies.o
    is an empty directory to put object files in if you recompile these.

  Goodies.dodec
  Goodies.icos
  Goodies.icosi
  Goodies.intersect
    are the executables produced from the above, in case you don't have
    a C compiler.

!Drawf
------

  is a Wimp front end for mkdrawf and decdrawf. You can just double-click
  on the icon to run the program. Inside...

  !Drawf.Source.c
    contains the C source code for !Drawf.

  !Drawf.Source.o
    contains `o.glib', a small library which contains some rather low-level
    functions for interacting with the Wimp. (Most are basically just SWI
    veneers.) If you want the source code for this, ask me.

  !Drawf.Source.h
    contains header files for the stuff in o.glib.

  !Drawf.Source.Makefile
    is a makefile. Amazing. You won't be able to use it to re-make
    o.glib, because you don't have the source code.

  !Drawf.Run
  !Drawf.!RunImage
  !Drawf.!Sprites
  !Drawf.Sprites
  !Drawf.Templates
    are just what you think they are.
